
Code Configuration
==================

[TOC]

Many aspects of GADGET-4 are controlled with compile-time options
rather than run-time options in the parameterfile. This is done in
order to allow the generation of highly optimised binaries by the
compiler, even when the underlying source code allows for many
different ways to run the code.  Unfortunately, this technique has the
disadvantage that different simulations typically require different
binary executables of GADGET-4, so "installing" GADGET-4 on a computer
system is not possible, and the act of compiling the code is an
integral part of working with the code. Keeping the executable at a
single place is not recommended either, because if several simulations
are run concurrently, this invokes the danger that a simulation is
started or resumed with the wrong binary. Note that while GADGET-4
checks the plausibility of some of the most important code options,
this is not done for all of them. Hence, to minimise the risk of using
the wrong code for a simulation, it is highly recommended to produce a
separate executable for each simulation that is run.

As a piece of advice, a good strategy for doing this in practice is to
create a separate directory for each simulation that is made, place a
copy of the whole simulation source code together with its makefile
into this directory, compile the code there and run it in this
directory as well, with the output directory specified as a
subdirectory of the simulation directory. In this way, the code and
its settings become a logical and integral part of the output
generated by the code. Everything belonging to a given simulation is
packaged up in one directory, and it becomes easy to reproduce what
was done even if considerable time should have passed, because the
precise version of the original code that was used and all produced
log files are readily available. An alternative is to have only a
single copy of the code, but then to use a separate directory for each
simulation that is done, including placing its configuration file
there and carrying out the compilation in this directory as well (by
passing the `make DIR=` option to the build as well). Then at least
all object files and the executable are unambiguously associated with
a particular simulation run.

The easiest way to create the file `Config.sh` needed for compilation
is to produce it as a copy of `Template-Config.sh` , and then modify
it as needed. When created from `Template-Config.sh` , the `Config.sh`
file contains a dummy list of all available compile-time code options,
with most of them commented out by default. To activate a certain
feature, the corresponding symbol should be commented in, and given
the desired value, if appropriate.

**Important Note:**

Whenever you change one of the options described below, a full
recompilation of the code may in general be necessary. For this
reason, the `Config.sh` itself has been added to the list of
dependences of each source file in the makefile, such that a complete
recompilation should happen automatically when the configuration file
is changed and the command `make` is given. Note that a manual
recompilation of the whole code can be enforced with the command `make
clean` , which will erase all object files, followed by `make` .

Most code options in `Config.sh` are switches that toggle a certain
feature on/off. Some of the symbols also take on a value if set. The
following list shows these switches with fiducial example values where
appropriate.

-------

Parallelization options                                {#parallel}
=======================



**IMPOSE_PINNING**

Ask the code to pin MPI processes to cores in an optimum fashion. This
requires the hwloc library for detecting the processor topology.  It
will generally only work on Linux. Note that most modern MPI libraries
can also be asked to arrange for the pinning via options to the MPI
start-up command, or they do this per default anyhow.

-------

**IMPOSE_PINNING_OVERRIDE_MODE**

In case the MPI start-up has already established a pinning, this is
normally detected and then `IMPOSE_PINNING` does not do
anything. Overriding this pre-established pinning can be enforced with
this option.

-------

**EXPLICIT_VECTORIZATION**

This enables a few compute kernel (currently in SPH only) to
explicitly use AVX instructions through the use of the vectorclass C++
library.

-------

**PRESERVE_SHMEM_BINARY_INVARIANCE**

This can be used to preserve the order in which partial results are
added in case the parallel tree walks use shared memory to access tree
branch data that has been imported by different processes on the same
shared memory node. In this case, exact binary invariance of output
can be retained upon reruns of the code.

-------

**SIMPLE_DOMAIN_AGGREGATION**

This tries to very roughly restrict the domain decomposition to place
adjacent domain pieces on the same shared memory node. This will then
(in some cases significantly) reduce the number of imports of
particles and nodes that need to be made, but at the price of a higher
imbalance overall. Whether this is worth it depends strongly on the
problem type. A better (forthcoming) solution will be to do the domain
decomposition hierarchically right away, taking the outline of the
shared-memory nodes into account from the outset.

-------



Basic operation mode of code                             {#basic}
============================

**PERIODIC**

Set this option if you want to have periodic boundary conditions. In
this case, the `BoxSize` parameter in the parameterfile becomes
relevant.

-------

**TWODIMS**

This effectively switches off one spatial dimension in SPH, i.e. the
code follows only 2D hydrodynamics either in the xy-, yz-, or
xz-plane. One doesn't need to tell the code explicitly which of these
planes are used, but all coordinates of the third dimension need to be
exactly equal (usually set to zero).

-------

**ONEDIMS**

Similarly to `TWODIMS`, this effectively only allows one spatial
dimension in SPH, i.e. the code follows only 1D hydrodynamics either
in the x-, y-, or z-directions. One doesn't need to tell the code
explicitly which of these directions are used, but all coordinates of
the other dimensions should be set to zero.

-------

**LONG_X_BITS** = 2

In case periodic boundary conditions are used (i.e. `PERIODIC` is on),
one can stretch the x-dimension of the box relative to `BoxSize` by
the factor `1 / 2^LONG_X_BITS`. A setting equal to 2 like in this
example, would hence mean that the boxsize in the x-direction will be
`BoxSize/4`.

-------

**LONG_Y_BITS** = 2

Similarly to the above, this switch can stretch the periodic box in the
y-direction by the factor `1/2^LONG_Y_BITS` relative to BoxSize.

-------

**LONG_Z_BITS** = 1

Finally, this option implements a possible stretch in the z-direction, similar
to `LONG_X` and `LONG_Y`. Only a subset of the stretch factors or several/all
of them may be used. The `LONG_X/Y/Z_BITS` values must be positive integers.

-------

**NTYPES** = 6

Number of particle types that should be used by the code. If not set,
a default value of 6 is adopted (which is the fixed value realised in
GADGET-2/3). The different particle types are useful as a means to
organize the simulation particles into different logical sets, which
can be helpful for analysis (e.g., one may have a type for dark
matter, one for stars, one for disk stars, etc.). The type 0 is
reserved for gas particles, and to them SPH is applied. All other
particle types are treated as collisionless particles which are
treated on the same footing as far as gravity is concerned. For each
of the types, one needs to specify a gravitational softening class in
the parameterfile.

-------

**GADGET2_HEADER**

This should be set if backwards compatibility of the snapshot file
header format with GADGET-2/3 is required. Applies only to file
formats 1 and 2. This can be useful, for example, to read in old
initial conditions. Note that in this case NTYPES may not be larger
than 6, and it should be at least as large as the number of types
actually contained in the legacy initial conditions. Also, files
cannot have more than 2^31 particles of any type in total in this
case.

-------

**SECOND_ORDER_LPT_ICS**

Processes the initial conditions before actual simulation start-up to
add in second order Lagrangian perturbation theory corrections. This
only works for specially constructed initial conditions created with
Adrian Jenkin's IC code.

-------

**LEAN**

This option is meant for special DM-only simulations that aim at high
savings in memory use. Only a uniform particle mass, a single particle
type, no hydrodynamics, and a single softening class are allowed. In
addition, one should use `TREEPM_NOTIMESPLIT`, and refrain from using
double precision to obtain a very small memory footprint.

-------

Gravity calculation                                  {#grav}
===================

**SELFGRAVITY**

This needs to be switched on if self-gravity should be computed by the
code. If it is off, one can still have hydrodynamics, and optionally a
prescribed external gravitational field.

-------

**HIERARCHICAL_GRAVITY**

If this is enabled, the time integration is carried out in a
hierarchically fashion in which the gravitational Hamiltonian is
hierarchically split into slow and fast dynamics. The advantage of
this approach is that small subsystems on short timesteps can be
cleanly decoupled from the more slowly evolving rest of the
system. This can be advantageous especially if there is a very deep and
increasingly thinly populated tail in the timestep distribution. It
also allows a time integration that is formally momentum conserving
despite the use of individual timesteps.  However, as additional
partial forces need to be computed, this approach typically entails a
somewhat higher number of force calculations. This can still be more
efficient overall, but only if the number of particles per timebin
quickly declines when going to shorter timebins.

-------

**FMM**

If this is enabled, the Fast Multipole Method for gravity calculations
instead of the one-sided classic tree algorithm is used.

-------

**MULTIPOLE_ORDER** = 2

If this is enabled, one can control the order of the multipole
expansion that is used. For a value of 3, quadrupole moments are
included in the normal tree calculation and/or in the FMM
calculations. A value of 4 includes octupole moments as well, and 5
goes further to hexadecupole moments. Note that these higher orders
increase the memory and CPU time needed for the force calculations,
but deliver more accurate forces in turn. It depends on the specific
application whether this is worthwhile. The default is a value of 2.

-------

**EXTRA_HIGH_EWALD_ACCURACY**

If this is extrapolated, the Ewald corrections are extrapolated from
the look-up table with a third order Taylor expansion (quite a bit
more expansive), otherwise a second order Taylor expansion is used.

-------

**EXTRAPOTTERM**

If this is activated, the extra multipole term in principle present
for the potential computation is evaluated, even though it does not
enter the force. For example, for monopole/dipole order (p=2), the
code will then compute quadrupole moments and use them in the
potential, but not in the force computation.

-------

**ALLOW_DIRECT_SUMMATION**

When this is set (it requires `HIERARCHICAL_GRAVITY`), the code will
calculate the gravitational forces for very small groups of particles
(the threshold for the group size is given by the constant
`DIRECT_SUMMATION_THRESHOLD`, which is set per default to 500, but one
can override this value in the config file if desired) with direct
summation. This can be useful if the timestep distribution has a tail
to very short, poorly occupied timebins. Doing the corresponding
timesteps frequently for very small sets of particles can be faster
with direct summation than doing it via the tree or FMM because then
all overhead associated with tree construction and tree walks can be
avoided.

-------

**RANDOMIZE_DOMAINCENTER**

When this is activated the whole particle set is randomly shifted in
the simulation box whenever a domain decomposition is done. This
can be useful to average out in time subtle spatial correlations in
the force errors that arise from the relative positioning of the
particle to the oct-tree geometry. Since integer coordinates are used
for particle positions, this shifting does not entail any round-off
error, and is reversible. In particular, the shifts will not be
visible in any of the outputs created. This option is basically always
recommended, and should have only positive effects.

-------

**RANDOMIZE_DOMAINCENTER_TYPES** = 2

Can be set to select one or several types (this is a bitmask) which
will then be used to locate the extension of a certain region. When
the particle set is randomly translated throughout the box, the code
will then try to avoid intersecting large oct-tree node boundaries
with this region. When this option is not set explicitely but
PLACEHIGHRESREGION is active, then this is automatically done
with a default setting RANDOMIZE_DOMAINCENTER_TYPES=PLACEHIGHRESREGION.

-------

**EVALPOTENTIAL**

When this is activated, the code also computes the gravitational
potential (which is not needed for the dynamics). This costs a bit of
extra memory and CPU-time.

-------

**TREE_NUM_BEFORE_NODESPLIT** = 4

The number of particles that may be in a tree node before it is split
into daughter nodes. If the number is reduced to 1, a fully threaded
tree is obtained in which leaf nodes contain one particle each. (Note
that empty nodes are not stored, except potentially for part of the
top-level tree if it is very finely refined.)

-------

**EXTERNALGRAVITY**

If this is switched on, an external gravitational field can be added
to the dynamics. One still has to define with different switches
and/or parameters what this external field is.

-------

**EXTERNALGRAVITY_STATICHQ**

Activates a simple external potential due to a Hernquist dark matter
halo, with parameters specified in the parameterfile.

-------


TreePM Options                                             {#treepm}
==============

**PMGRID** = 512

This enables the TreePM method, i.e. the long-range force is computed
with a PM-algorithm, and the short range force with the tree or with
FMM. The parameter has to be set to the size of the mesh that should
be used, e.g. 64, 96, 128, etc. The mesh dimensions need not
necessarily be a power of two, but the FFT is fastest for such a
choice. Note: If the simulation is not in a periodic box, then a FFT
method for vacuum boundaries is employed, where due to the required
zero-padding, only half the mesh is covering the region with
particles.  (see also the `HRPMGRID` option).

-------

**ASMTH** = 1.25

This can be used to override the value assumed for the scale that
defines the long-range/short-range force-split in the TreePM
algorithm. The default value is 1.25, in units of mesh-cells. A larger
value will make the transition region better resolved by the mesh,
yielding higher accuracy and less residual scatter in the force
matching region, but at the same time the region that needs to be
covered by the tree/FMM grows, which makes the computation more
expensive.

-------

**RCUT** = 6.0

This can be used to override the maximum radius out to which the
short-range tree-force is evaluated in case the TreePM/FMM-PM
algorithm is used. The conservative default value is 7.0 for this
parameter, given in mesh-cells. Going much beyond 6.0 does however
not yield much further improvement in the way the force matching region
is treated, and reducing this value to 4.5 will give higher performance
while being typically sufficiently accurate for most applications.

-------

**NTAB** = 128

This can be used to define the size of the short-range lookup table. The
default should normally be sufficient to have negligible influence on
the obtained force accuracy.

-------

**PLACEHIGHRESREGION** = 2

If this option is set (will only work together with `PMGRID` ), then
the short range force computation in the TreePM/FMM-PM algorithm is
accelerated by an additional intermediate mesh with isolated boundary
conditions that is placed onto a certain region of high-res
particles. This procedure can be useful for zoom-simulations, where
the majority of particles (the "high-res" particles) are occupying
only a small fraction of the volume. To activate this, the option
needs to be set to an integer value in the form of a bit mask that
encodes the particle type(s) that should be used to define the spatial
location of the high-resolution patch. For example, if types 1 and 4
are supposed to define this region, then the parameter should be set
to `PLACEHIGHRESREGION=2+16` , i.e.  to the sum 2^1+2^4. The actual
spatial region is then determined automatically from the current
locations of these particle types. This high-res zone may also
intersect with the box boundaries if periodic boundaries are
used. Once the spatial region is defined by the code, it however
applies to all particle types. In fact, the short range interactions
between particle pairs that fall fully inside the high-res region are
computed in terms of two contributions, one from the intermediate PM
mesh that covers the high-res region, and the other from a tree/FMM
force that however now only extends to a region that is reduced in
size (which is the origin of a possible speed-up with this
option). Particle pairs for which at least one of the partners is
outside the high-res region get the normal Tree/FMM contribution with
the standard cut-off region, corresponding to the plain TreePM
approach with the course grid covering the full simulation
volume. Also note that when the particle set is randomized throughout
the box (with the `RANDOMIZE_DOMAINCENTER` option), the code
additionally tries to avoid intersecting larger oct-tree node
boundaries by imposing certain restrictions in the randomization.


-------

**HRPMGRID** = 512

When `PMGRID` is set and non-periodic simulations are used, or when
`PLACEHIGHRESREGION` is active, the FFT algorithm is used to compute
non-periodic gravitational fields, which requires zero-padding,
i.e. only one octant of the used grid can actually be covered by the
mass distribution. The grid size that the code uses for these FFTs is
equal to `HRPMGRID` if this is set, otherwise the value of `PMGRID` is
used for this grid dimension as well. This option is hence optional,
and allows if desired the use of different FFT sizes for the periodic
calculation covering the whole region, and for the non-periodic
calculations covering the zoom region.

-------

**FFT_COLUMN_BASED**

Normally, the code employs a slab-based approach to parallelize the
FFT grids across the MPI ranks. However, for a Ngrid^3 FFT, this means
that at most Ngrid different MPI ranks can participate in the
computation. This represents a serious limit to scalability as the
minimum computational effort per MPI rank then scales as Ngrid^2, and
not more than Ngrid MPI ranks can anyhow be used. If one is in the
regime where the number of MPI ranks exceeds Ngrid, it is therefore a
good idea to activate `FFT_COLUMN_BASED`, which will use a
slab-decomposition instead. Now the minimum effort per MPI rank scales
only as Ngrid, and the maximum number of ranks that can participate is
Ngrid^2, meaning that in practice this limit will not be
encountered. The results should not be affected by this
option. Because the column-based approach requires twice the number of
transpose operations, it is normally somewhat slower than the
slab-based approach in the regime where the latter can still scale
(i.e. for Ngrid >= Ncpu), so only for very large small processor
numbers and large grid sizes, the column based approach can be
expected to yield a speed advantage, aside from the better memory
balance it provides.

-------

**PM_ZOOM_OPTIMIZED**

Set this option if the particle distribution is spatially extremely
inhomogeneous, like in a zoom simulation. In this case, the FFT
algorithm will use a different communication strategy that can better
deal with this inhomogeneity and maintain work balance despite of
it. If the particle distribution is reasonably homogenous (like in a
uniformly sampled cosmological box), it is normally better to leave
this option off. In this case, a simpler communication strategy well
adapted to this situation is used which avoids some of the overhead
required by the `PM_ZOOM_OPTIMIZED` option.

-------

**TREEPM_NOTIMESPLIT**

When activated, the long- and short-range gravity forces are simply
summed up to a total force, and then integrated in time with a common
timestep. Otherwise, the short-range forces are subcycled, and the PM
force size is stored separately and integrated on a global, longer
timestep.

-------

**GRAVITY_TALLBOX** = 2

This can be used to set-up gravity with mixed-mode boundary
conditions. The spatial dimension selected by the option is treated
with non-periodic boundaries, while the other two are treated with
periodic boundary conditions.  This can facilitate, for example,
stratified box simulations in which there is periodicity in the
transverse directions (which define, e.g., the plane of a sheet) and
open boundary conditions in the perpendicular direction. Set-ups of
this kind are often used in simulations of star formation.

-------


Treatment of gravitational softening                  {#softening}
====================================

**NSOFTCLASSES** = 4

Number of different softening values. Traditionally, this is set equal
to the number of particle types, but it can also be chosen
differently. The mapping of a particle type to a particular softening
class is normally done through the parameter values
`SofteningClassOfPartTypeX` as specified in the parameterfile.
Several different particle types could be mapped to the same softening
class in this case, and not all softening classes actually must be
used by particles. With the help of the `INDIVIDUAL_GRAVITY_SOFTENING`
option, the mapping can also be based on the particle mass, so that
particles of the same type may be mapped to different softening
lengths if their masses are different. This is an attractive option
especially for zoom simulations in order to allow heavier boundary
particles to be automatically associated with the closest natural
softening length from the tableau of available softening lengths.

-------

**INDIVIDUAL_GRAVITY_SOFTENING** = 4+8+16

If this option is enabled, the selected particle types
(`INDIVIDUAL_GRAVITY_SOFTENING` is interpreted as a binary mask
specifying these types) calculate for each of their particles a target
softening based on a cube-root scaling with the particle mass. As a
reference point, the code takes the softening class assigned for
particle type 1, and the average particle mass of the type 1
particles. The idea is to use this option for zoom simulations, where
one assigns the high-resolution collisionless particles to type 1 (all
with equal mass) and maps the type 1 to a certain softening class,
which then fixes the softening assigned for type 1. For all other used
particles types (which typically may involve variable masses within
the type), one then activates this option. For the corresponding
particles, a desired softening is computed based on a cube-root
scaling with their masses relative to the reference mass and softening
of the type 1 particles. From all the available softening classes, the
code then assigns the softening class with the smallest logarithmic
difference in softening length to the computed target softening
length. Since only the available softening classes can be used for
this, one should aim to supply a fine enough set of available
softening classes when this option is used.


-------

**ADAPTIVE_HYDRO_SOFTENING**

Sometimes, one may want to scale the gravitational softening length of
gas particles with their SPH smoothing length. This can be achieved
with this option. Enabling it, requires additional parameters in the
parameterfile, namely `GasSoftFactor`, `MinimumComovingHydroSoftening`
and `AdaptiveHydroSofteningSpacing`. When this option is used, the
softening type 0 is not available for any other particle type (and
also won't be selected by types included in
`INDIVIDUAL_GRAVITY_SOFTENING`). `SofteningClassOfPartType0` needs to be
0, and all other particle types need to have a non-zero value for
their SofteningClassOfPartType. The softening values specified in the
parameterfile for softening type 0 are ignored, instead the softening
is selected for all gas particles based on their smoothing length from
a finely spaced discrete table (see explanations for the above
softening parameters).

-------


SPH formulation                                          {#sph}
===============

**PRESSURE_ENTROPY_SPH**

Enables the pressure-entropy formulation of SPH (similar to Hopkins
2013), otherwise the default density-entropy formulation (Springel &
Hernquist, 2002) is used.

-------

**OUTPUT_PRESSURE_SPH_DENSITY**

Outputs also density computed as in the standard SPH pressure-entropy
formulation. This is only useful if `PRESSURE_ENTROPY_SPH` is used.

-------

**INITIAL_CONDITIONS_CONTAIN_ENTROPY**

The intial conditions file contains entropy instead of the thermal energy.

------

**GAMMA** = 1.4

Sets the equation of state index in the ideal gas law that is normally
used in GADGET-4's SPH implementation. If not set, the default of 5/3
for a mono-atomic gas is used.

-------

**ISOTHERM_EQS** 

This defines an isothermal equation of state, P = rho c^2, where c^2
is kept constant for every particle at the value u = c^2 read from the
initial conditions in the internal energy per unit mass field. `GAMMA=1`
is set automatically in this case.

-------

**REUSE_HYDRO_ACCELERATIONS_FROM_PREVIOUS_STEP**

If this option is enabled, the code does not recompute the SPH
hydrodynamical acceleration at the beginning of a timestep, but rather
reuses the one computed at the end of the previous timestep, which is
typically good enough. The two accelerations can in principle differ
slightly due to non-reversible viscous effects, or external source
functions (e.g. radiative heating or cooling).

-------

**IMPROVED_VELOCITY_GRADIENTS**

Use more accurate estimates for the velocity gradients following Hu
et. al (2014), which enter the calculation of a time-dependent
artificial viscosity.

-------

**VISCOSITY_LIMITER_FOR_LARGE_TIMESTEPS**

Limits the maximum hydrodynamical acceleration due to the artificial
viscosity such that the viscosity term cannot change the sign of the
relative velocity projected on the particle distance vector.  This
should not be necessary if small enough timestepping is chosen.

--------

SPH kernel options                                     {#kernel}
=====================

**CUBIC_SPLINE_KERNEL**

Enables the cubic spline kernel as defined in Springel et al. (2001).

-------

**WENDLAND_C2_KERNEL**

Enables the Wendland C2 kernel as discussed in Dehnen & Aly (2012).

-------

**WENDLAND_C4_KERNEL**

Enables the Wendland C4 kernel as discussed in Dehnen & Aly (2012).

-------

**WENDLAND_C6_KERNEL**

Enables the Wendland C6 kernel as discussed in  Dehnen & Aly (2012).

-------

**WENDLAND_BIAS_CORRECTION**

Reduces the self contribution for Wendland kernels following Dehnen &
Aly (2012), their equations (18) and (19). Only works in 3D.

-------

SPH viscosity options                                     {#visc}
=====================

**TIMEDEP_ART_VISC**

Enables-time dependent viscosity.

-------

**HIGH_ART_VISC_START**

Start with high rather than low viscosity.

-------

**NO_SHEAR_VISCOSITY_LIMITER**

Turns of the shear viscosity suppression.

-------


Extra physics                                             {#physics}
=============

**COOLING**

Enables radiative cooling based on the collisional ionization equilibrium in the
presence of a spatially constant but time-variable UV background. The network
computed is similar to that described in the paper by Katz et al. (1996).
Note that metal-line cooling is not included in this module.

-------

**STARFORMATION**

If this is enabled, the code can create new star particles out of SPH
particles. The default star formation model that is implemented
corresponds to a basic varient of the sub-resolution multi-phase model
described in Springel & Hernquist (2003,
<http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2003MNRAS.339..289S>). By default, the
new star particles are created as particle type 4, but if desired, one
can also specify another type for them by setting the compile time
flag `STAR_TYPE` to a different value. Make sure that a gravitational
softening length is defined for the chosen type.

-------

Time integration options                                    {#time}
========================

**FORCE_EQUAL_TIMESTEPS**

This adopts a global timestep for all particles, determined by pushing
all particles down to the smallest timestep desired by any of the
particles. The step size may still be variable in this case, but it is
the same for all particles.

-------


Single/double precision and data types                     {#precision}
======================================

**POSITIONS_IN_32BIT**

When this is set, the internal storage of positions will be based on
32-bit unsigned integers. If single precision is used as default in
the code (i.e.  `DOUBLEPRECISION` is not set), then this is the
default if none of the `POSITIONS_IN_XXBIT` options is selected.

-------

**POSITIONS_IN_64BIT**

When this is set, the internal storage of positions will be based on
64-bit unsigned integers, otherwise on 32-bit unsigned integers. If
double precision is used as default in the code
(i.e. `DOUBLEPRECISION` is set to 1), then this is the default if none
of the `POSITIONS_IN_XXBIT` options is selected.

-------

**POSITIONS_IN_128BIT**

With this option, the internal storage of positions will be based on
128-bit unsigned integers, offering an extreme spatial dynamic
range. Use of this should be only of interest in truly extreme
scenarios.

-------

**DOUBLEPRECISION** = 1

This makes the code store all internal particle data in double
precision. Note that output files may nevertheless be written by
converting the values in files to single precision, unless
`OUTPUT_IN_DOUBLEPRECISION` is activated.

-------

**DOUBLEPRECISION_FFTW**

If this is set, the code will use the double-precision version of FTTW
and store the corresponding field values in real and complex space in
double. Otherwise single precision is used throughout for this.

-------

**OUTPUT_IN_DOUBLEPRECISION**

The output snapshot files will be written in double precision when
this is enabled. This is helpful to avoid round-off errors when using
snapshot files for a restart, but will rarely be required for
scientific analysis, except perhaps for spatial coordinates, where
many zoom simulations are insufficiently represented by single
precision.  Outputting in mixed precision, double precision for
coordinates and single precision for everything else, can therefore be
a useful option for these simulations to save storage space without
sacrificing anything in the analysis.

-------

**ENLARGE_DYNAMIC_RANGE_IN_TIME**

This extends the dynamic range of the integer timeline from 32 to 64
bit, i.e. the smallest possible timestep is approximately 2^64 times
smaller than the simulated timespan instead of 2^32 times.
Correspondingly, the number of timebins grows from 32 to 64 in this
case.

-------

**IDS_32BIT**

If this is set, the code uses 32-bit particle IDs, hence at most 2^32
particles may be used.  This is the default setting.

-------

**IDS_48BIT**

If this is set, the code uses 48-bit particle IDs, allowing some
smaller fields to be packed into this variable before a long-word
boundary is reached.  At most 2^48 particles can be used.

-------

**IDS_64BIT**

If this is set, the code uses 64-bit particle IDs.

-------

**USE_SINGLEPRECISION_INTERNALLY**

If this is activated, internal computations are carried out in single
precision instead of double precision. On some architectures (but not
on all -- often current CPUs use the same number of cycles for a
single and a double precision operation), this can make some of the
computations faster, but comes with a loss of precision, of
course. Use with extreme care.

-------

**NUMBER_OF_MPI_LISTENERS_PER_NODE** = 1

For multi-node runs, normally one MPI rank is set aside per
shared-memory node to asynchronously process incoming communication
requests. If the shared-memory node has a very large number of cores,
it might be helpful to have more than such communication processes,
which can be set with this parameter. If the number of cores per
shared memory node is larger than 64, then this in fact has to be
done, see also the `MAX_NUMBER_OF_RANKS_WITH_SHARED_MEMORY` option.

-------

**MAX_NUMBER_OF_RANKS_WITH_SHARED_MEMORY** = 64

This sets the maximum number of MPI ranks on a node that have one MPI
listener assigned to them, and can access each other via shared
memory. Possible values are 32 and 64, the default being 64. If the
total number of cores per node divided by
`NUMBER_OF_MPI_LISTENERS_PER_NODE` is at most 32, a setting of 32 can
be used to save a small amount of memory. If the total number of cores
per node divided by `NUMBER_OF_MPI_LISTENERS_PER_NODE` is above 64,
you need to increase `NUMBER_OF_MPI_LISTENERS_PER_NODE`.

-------


Output/Input options                                       {#io}
====================

**POWERSPEC_ON_OUTPUT**

Creates a power spectrum measurement for every output time, i.e. for
every snapshot that is created. This is meant to be used in
cosmological simulations.

-------

**REDUCE_FLUSH**

The code produces relatively verbose log-file messages. To make sure
that they immediately appear in the log-file, a flush statement on the
output stream is executed when outputting a new log message. On slow
or overloaded filesystems, this can become a significant source of
overhead. To avoid this, this option can be used. A log-file flush is
then only done on intervals determined via the `FlushCpuTimeDiff`
parameter.

-------

**OUTPUT_POTENTIAL**

This will force the code to compute gravitational potentials for all
particles each time a snapshot file is generated. These values are
then included in the snapshot files. Note that the computation of the
values of the potential incurs some computational overhead.

-------

**OUTPUT_ACCELERATION**

This will include the physical gravitational acceleration of each
particle in the snapshot files.

-------

**OUTPUT_TIMESTEP**

This outputs the timestep used by the particles. Useful only to test
whether the timestep criteria behave in the intended way.

-------

**OUTPUT_PRESSURE**

This outputs values for the pressure of each SPH particle (i.e. only
for particles of type 0) to the snapshot files.

-------

**OUTPUT_VELOCITY_GRADIENT**

This outputs the SPH estimates of the velocity gradients to the
snapshot files, separately for the vx, vy, and vz components, i.e. one
gets three 3-vectors.

-------

**OUTPUT_ENTROPY**

When this option is activated, the code writes the values of the
entropic variable associated with each SPH particle to the snapshot
files.

-------

**OUTPUT_CHANGEOFENTROPY**

This outputs the rate of change of entropy for each particle. Only the
dissipative change due to shock heating is normally included here,
meaning that radiative changes of the entropy are not included in this
field, only the viscous heating from the artificial viscosity is.

-------

**OUTPUT_DIVVEL**

With this option, one can request an output of the velocity divergence
for each SPH particle in the snapshot files.

-------

**OUTPUT_CURLVEL**

Likewise for the curl of the velocity field of all SPH particles,
which is output in snapshots when this option is activated.

-------

**OUTPUT_COOLHEAT**

With this option, the actual rate of energy loss due to radiative
cooling (or heating) can be output to the snapshot files. This option
requires `COOLING` to be active as well.

-------

**OUTPUT_VISCOSITY_PARAMETER**

With this option, one can request an output of the viscosity parameter
for each SPH particle in the snapshot files. This option requires
`TIMEDEP_ART_VISC` to be active as well.

-------

**OUTPUT_NON_SYNCHRONIZED_ALLOWED**

If this option is activated, outputs occur precisely at the prescribed
desired output times, with particles being (linearly) drifted to this
time, while velocities stay at the values they had after the last
kick. Otherwise (which is the default), snapshots are only written at
times when all particles are synchronized, and all timesteps have been
completed with closing half-step velocity kicks. The desired output
times are mapped to the closest full synchronization points, to the
extent possible (note that if the spacing of desired output times is
finer than the largest timestep size, some desired output times may
have to be skipped).

-------

**OUTPUT_VELOCITIES_IN_HALF_PRECISION**

Stores particle velocities in half-precision format.

-------

**OUTPUT_ACCELERATIONS_IN_HALF_PRECISION**

Stores accelerations in half-precision. To prevent a potential
overflow of the values, the actually stored values are normalized by
the factor 10*H*V200, with V200 = 1000 km/sec.

-------

**OUTPUT_COORDINATES_AS_INTEGERS**

Does not convert the internal integer coordinations to floating point
before output, but rather outputs them in integer representation.
This retains more bits of information, and may give rise to better
compression possibilities if the particle data is spatially ordered.

-------

**ALLOW_HDF5_COMPRESSION**

When this is enabled, certain output fields in the HDF5 output are
compressed when written. The compression/decompression is done on the
fly, and is transparent to the user (but implies slightly slower I/O
speed).

-------

On the fly FOF groupfinder                                  {#fof}
==========================

**FOF**

This switch enables the friends-of-friends group finder of the code. In this
case, the code will always run the FOF group finder whenever a snapshot is
produced. This is done directly before the snapshot is written to disk, allowing
the particle data in the snapshot files to be arranged in group order, i.e. it
is easy to read the particles of any desired group. Also, when FOF is set, the
code can be applied in postprocessing mode to compute group catalogues for
existing snapshots. The snapshot in question is then written a second time with
a name suffix "reordered", with the particle data arrange in group order.

-------

**FOF_PRIMARY_LINK_TYPES** = 2

This identifies via a bitmask the particle type or types to which the
friends-of-friends linking algorithm should be applied. Conventionally
these are (high-resolution) dark matter particles stored in type 1, so
the default for this parameter is 2.

-------

**FOF_SECONDARY_LINK_TYPES** = 1+16+32

All particles of types selected by this bitmask are looking for the
nearest particle from the set covered by `FOF_PRIMARY_LINK_TYPES` and
are then made member of the FOF group this particle belongs to. The
idea is that the groups found with the plain FOF algorithm incorporate
all co-spatial particles from the set described by
`FOF_SECONDARY_LINK_TYPES`. This is useful especially for
hydrodynamical cosmological simulations with radiative processes and
star formation. In this case, the spatial distribution of baryons
becomes very different from the dark matter, so that applying the
friends-of-friends method to both dark matter and baryonic particles
at the same time would yield highly distorted results. It is then much
cleaner to do this only for the non-dissipative dark matter, and let
these halos collect the baryons in the same halo with this option.

-------

**FOF_GROUP_MIN_LEN** = 32

The minimum length a group needs to have before being stored in the
group catalogue is set with this parameter. The default number is 32.

-------

**FOF_LINKLENGTH** = 0.2

Dimensionless linking length for the friends of friends algorithm. The
code will cast this into a comoving linking length by estimating the
mean particle spacing from the dark matter density (as given by
`OmegaDM` - `OmegaBaryon`) and the mean particle mass of all the
particles selected with the `FOF_PRIMARY_LINK_TYPES` mask. It makes
sense that the mass of all these particles is equal, only then the FOF
algorithm is known to produce well understood results. If in doubt,
check the log file for the linking length that is computed.

-------

**FOF_ALLOW_HUGE_GROUPLENGTH**

Normally, the length of individual FOF groups and subhalos is
restricted to reach at most 2^31 ~ 2 billion particles. If this is
activated, it can be more.

-------


Subfind                                                     {#subfind}
=======

**SUBFIND**

When this is switched on, all identified FOF groups are subjected to a
search for gravitationally bound substructures with the SUBFIND
algorithm, as described in Springel et al. (2001),
<http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2001MNRAS.328..726S>. The snapshot
outputs that are produced are automatically ordered in group plus
subhalo order, i.e. all particles of the same group are stored
subsequently, and subhalos are nested within each group, i.e. the
particles are arranged in the order of the groups and subhalos.

-------

**SUBFIND_HBT**

This enables an implementation of the hierarchical bound tracing
algorithm, where subhalo candidates are identified with the help of a
substructure catalogue from a precious time instead of doing this with
density excursion sets. This option requires both `SUBFIND` and
`MERGERTREE`.

-------

**SUBFIND_STORE_LOCAL_DENSITY**

This will calculate local densities and velocity dispersions for *all*
particles, not only for particles in FOFs, and store them in snapshot
files.

-------

**SUBFIND_ORPHAN_TREATMENT**

This produces special snapshot files after group catalogues are
produced that contain only particles that have formerly been most
bound particles of a subhalo. This can later be used by semi-analytic
models of galaxy formation coupled to the merger tree output to treat
temporarily lost or disrupted subhalos.

-------


Merger tree algorithm                                        {#mergertree}
=====================

**MERGERTREE**

This options enables an on-the-fly calculation of descendant subhalos,
which are then stored along with the group catalogues. This requires
`FOF` and `SUBFIND` to be set, and is meant to be used in cosmological
simulations with a large number of outputs. The merger tree
information can then be used in a final postprocessing step to
construct merger trees from all the group catalogues and
descendant/progenitor links produced on the fly (or in
postprocessing). The merger tree construction done in this way can in
principle be carried out without having to store the actual particle
data of the snapshot files.

-------

On-the-fly lightcone creation                                 {#lightcone}
=============================

**LIGHTCONE**

When this option is enabled, particle data is output continuously as
particles cross the backwards lightcone. The geometry of the lightcone
(or of several lightcones) is described by a separate input file as
specified in the parameterfile. If needed, also periodic replications
of the box are used to fill the lightcone volume. Note that either
`LIGHTCONE_PARTICLES` or `LIGHTCONE_MASSMAPS`, or both, need to be
selected as well if this option is activated.

-------

**LIGHTCONE_PARTICLES**

When this option is enabled, particle data is output continuously as
particles cross the backwards lightcone. The geometry of the lightcone
(or of several lightcones) is described by a separate input file as
specified in the parameterfile. If needed, also periodic replications
of the box are used to fill the lightcone volume.

-------

**LIGHTCONE_OUTPUT_ACCELERATIONS**

This outputs the gravitational accelerations of particles on the
lightcone, which can be used for gravitational lensing applications.

-------

**LIGHTCONE_MASSMAPS**

This option creates projected mass shells along the backwards
lightcone, for weak lensing applications. Requires the `LIGHTCONE`
option.

-------

**LIGHTCONE_PARTICLES_GROUPS**

This option runs the FOF (and SUBFIND if enabled) group finders on the
lightcone particle data before they are written to disk. Requires the
`LIGHTCONE` and `LIGHTCONE_PARTICLES` options.

-------

**LIGHTCONE_PARTICLES_SKIP_SAVING**

In case `LIGHTCONE_PARTICLES_GROUPS` is used, this option can be used to
avoid that actual particle data is saved along with the groups that are
found. 

-------

**LIGHTCONE_IMAGE_COMP_HSML_VELDISP**

This special option is only relevant for lightcone image creation, and
(re)computes adaptive smoothing lengths as well as local velocity
dispersions.

-------

**LIGHTCONE_MULTIPLE_ORIGINS**

If this is enabled, origins of lightcones different from (0, 0, 0) can 
be defined. Possible origins need to be listed in a separate file with 
the name `LightConeOriginsFile`. The light cone definitions file then needs
be augmented with a further number at the end of each lightcone 
definition, and this serves as an index into the list of lightcone origins.

-------

**REARRANGE_OPTION**

This option needs to be enabled to allow the rearrange lightcone
particle feature to work. It only needs to be on for the special
postprocessing option, otherwise it can be disabled to save memory.

-------


IC generation                                                 {#ics}
=============

**NGENIC** = 256

This master switch enables the creation of cosmological initial
conditions for simulations with periodic boundary conditions. The
value of `NGENIC` should be set to the FFT-grid size used for IC
generation, which should be at least as fine as the particle
resolution per dimension. If the code is started without restartflag
(i.e. when normally initial conditions are read), the code instead
creates the ICs first, followed by evolving them with the code,
i.e. in this case the initial conditions do not need to exist on
disk. One can however also start the code with restartflag 6, in which
case the ICs are produced and written to disk, followed by a stop of
the code. One can then also use the produced files as ICs in a regular
start of GADGET-4 without having the `NGENIC` option set.

-------

**CREATE_GRID**

If this is activated, the IC creation is carried out with a regular Cartesian
particle grid that is produced on the fly. Otherwise, the unperturbed particle
load is read in from the specified IC file, which allows the use of a so-called
glass files (which arise from evolving random Poisson samples with the sign of
gravity reversed until they settle in a quasi-equilibrium without preferred
directions) or of spatially variable resolution.

-------

**GENERATE_GAS_IN_ICS**

This option can be used to modify dark matter-only initial conditions
for cosmological simulations upon start-up of the simulation code. The
modification is to add gas to the simulation by splitting up dark
matter particles into a dark matter and gas particle, with masses set
by the specified cosmological parameters. The particle pair is
displaced in opposite directions from the original coordinate keeping
the center-of-mass fixed. The separation is such that the new dark
matter and gas particles form two interleaved grids that maximize the
relative distance between the two particle types and minimizes pairing
correlations. The velocities of the particles inherit the velocity of
the original dark matter particle. Note that here the transfer
functions of dark matter and gas are not distinguished, so this
procedure is only a rough approximation. It is however typically
sufficient on large scales and for galaxy formation.

-------

**SPLIT_PARTICLE_TYPE** = 4+8

This bitmask determines which of the dark matter particles contained
in the dark matter only initial conditions that are processed with
`GENERATE_GAS_IN_ICS` should be split up into gas and dark matter
particles. Normally, this should be done for all of the dark matter
particles to produce a volume filling gas phase.  However, sometimes
this is restricted to the high-resolution region in zoom simulations,
which can then be picked out with this option.

-------

**NGENIC_FIX_MODE_AMPLITUDES**

When activated, this leaves the mode amplitudes at sqrt[P(k)], instead
of sampling them from a Rayleigh distribution. This can be useful in
the context of the variance suppression technique of Angulo & Pontzen
(2016).

-------

**NGENIC_MIRROR_PHASES**

If this is activated, all phases in the created realization are turned
by 180 degrees. This is useful to realize a pair of simulations that
differ only by the sign of the initial density perturbations but which
are otherwise identical.

-------
 
**NGENIC_2LPT**
 
This option creates the initial conditions based on second-order
Lagrangian perturbation theory, instead of just using the Zeldovich
approximation. Especially when the starting redshift is low, this
option is recommended.

-------
 
**NGENIC_TEST**
 
This option is purely for testing purposes. When the code creates ICs
on the fly, it just measures the power spectrum of the produced ICs
and terminates.

-------



MPI related settings                                            {#mpi}
====================

**MPI_MESSAGE_SIZELIMIT_IN_MB** = 200

Some (especially older) MPI libraries are not overly stable when very
large transfers are done. Such transfers can however happen in
GADGET-4 for large simulations, for example in the domain
decomposition. With this option one can ask the code to automatically
split up such large transfers in a sequence of smaller transfers. The
maximum allowed size of one of the transfers in MB is set by the value
given to `MPI_MESSAGE_SIZELIMIT_IN_MB`.

-------

**NUMPART_PER_TASK_LARGE**

Set this if the number of particles per task is quite large, in particular so
large than 8 times this number can overflow a 32-bit integer. This means that
once you expect ~500 million or more particles on a single MPI rank, this option
needs to be set to guarantee that the PM algorithms still work correctly. Of
course, once you reach more than 2 billion particles per MPI rank, the code will
stop working anyhow due to integer overflows. The easy solution to this, of
course, is to increase the number of MPI ranks.

-------

**ISEND_IRECV_IN_DOMAIN**

This option can be used to replace the default communication pattern
used in the domain decomposition (and also in FOF and SUBFIND) which
is based on a hypercube with synchronous myMPI_Sendrecv() calls, with a
bunch of asynchronous communications. This should be faster in
principle, but it also tends to result in a huge number of
simultaneously open communication requests which can also choke the
MPI communication subsystem. Whether this works robustly and is indeed
faster will depend on the system and the simulation size. If in doubt,
rather stick with the default algorithm.

-------

**USE_MPIALLTOALLV_IN_DOMAINDECOMP**

Another approach to carry out the all-to-all communication occurring in
the domain decomposition is to simply use MPI's Alltoallv
function. This is done when this option is set, and one then
effectively hopes that the internal algorithm used by Alltoallv is the
most robust and fastest for the communication task at hand. This may
be the case, but there is no guarantee for it. The default algorithm
of GADGET-4 (hypercube with synchronous myMPI_Sendrecv), which is used
when this option is not used, should always be a reliable alternative,
however.

-------

**MPI_HYPERCUBE_ALLGATHERV**

Another issue with some MPI-libraries is that they may use quite a bit
of internal storage for carrying out MPI_Allgatherv. If this turns out
to be a problem, one can set this option. The code will then replace all
uses of MPI_Allgatherv() with a simpler communication pattern that
uses hypercubes with myMPI_Sendrecv as a work-around.

-------

**MPI_HYPERCUBE_ALLTOALL**

Some MPI libraries tend to be unstable for their myMPI_Alltoall. This is
replacing this with a robust hypercube communication pattern. Not 
necessarily the fastest, but very robust, scalable and with decent speed.

-------

**ALLOCATE_SHARED_MEMORY_VIA_POSIX**

If this is set, try to use POSIX directly to allocated shared memory in 
the virtual filesystem /dev/shm, instead of relying on the MPI-3 call
MPI_Win_allocate_shared() which on some systems executes in a sluggish
way.

-------

**OLDSTYLE_SHARED_MEMORY_ALLOCATION**

When activated reverts to old style memory allocation instead of using memfd_create()

-------


Testing and Debugging options                                    {#tests}
=============================

**DEBUG**

This option is only meant to enable core-dumps (which are typically
disabled by calling MPI_Init() on program start-up). This can be
useful to allow post-mortem analysis of a crash by loading the core
file with a debugger. Of course, the code should be compiled with
symbols included (-g option) to facilitate this, and it may also help
to set the optimization level to something low or disable
optimizations entirely to avoid confusing the debugger in some
situations.

-------

**DEBUG_ENABLE_FPU_EXCEPTIONS**

This option is useful in combination with DEBUG and tries to enable
FPU exceptions. In this case, an illegal mathematical floating point
instruction that creates a dreaded "Not a Number" (NaN) will trigger a
core file. With the debugger one can then quickly find the line in the
code that is the culprit.

-------

**DEBUG_SYMTENSORS**

This option executes a few selected unit tests on the symmetric-tensor
subroutines on start-up of the code.

-------

**HOST_MEMORY_REPORTING**

This option reports, when the code starts, available system memory
information by analyzing /proc/meminfo on Linux systems. It is enabled
by default on Linux.  Output of this option is found at the beginning
of the stdout log-file, and for example looks like this:

<PRE>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AvailMem:        Largest =   29230.83 Mb (on task=  24), Smallest =   29201.10 Mb (on task=  12), Average =   29215.28 Mb
Total Mem:       Largest =   32213.01 Mb (on task=   0), Smallest =   32213.01 Mb (on task=   0), Average =   32213.01 Mb
Committed_AS:    Largest =    3011.91 Mb (on task=  12), Smallest =    2982.18 Mb (on task=  24), Average =    2997.73 Mb
SwapTotal:       Largest =   23436.99 Mb (on task=   0), Smallest =   23436.99 Mb (on task=   0), Average =   23436.99 Mb
SwapFree:        Largest =   22588.00 Mb (on task=   0), Smallest =   21600.56 Mb (on task=  12), Average =   22020.50 Mb
AllocMem:        Largest =    3011.91 Mb (on task=  12), Smallest =    2982.18 Mb (on task=  24), Average =    2997.73 Mb
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Task=0 has the maximum committed memory and is host: sandy-022
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
</PRE>

-------

**ENABLE_HEALTHTEST**

When this is enabled, the code tries to assess upon start-up  whether all CPU cores 
are freely available and show the same execution speed. Also, the MPI bandwidth
both inside nodes and between nodes is tested.

-------


**FORCETEST** = 0.001

Calculates for the specified fraction of particles direct summation
forces, which can then be compared to the forces computed by the
Tree/PM/FMM algorithms of GADGET-4 in order to check or monitor the
force accuracy of the code. This is only included as a testing and
debugging option. The value of the option should be set to a number
between 0 and 1 (e.g. 0.001), and this number gives the fraction of
randomly chosen particles at each timestep for which forces by direct
summation are computed. The normal tree-forces and the exact direct
summation forces are then collected in a file `forcetest.txt` for
later inspection. Note that the simulation itself is unaffected by
this option, but it will of course run much(!) slower, particularly if
`FORCETEST * NumPart * NumPart >> NumPart` Note: The particle IDs must
be set to numbers >= 1 for this option to work.

-------

**FORCETEST_TESTFORCELAW** = 1

Special option for measuring the effective force law. Can be set to 1
or 2 for checking with TreePM/FMM-PM, or TreePM/FMM-PM +
PLACEHIGHRESREGION. The option `FORCETEST` must be activated as
well. The simulation needs to be fed with a special initial
conditions file for which only one particle has mass, the others are
massless test particles. The code will then go through cycles in which
the particle with the mass is randomly placed, and the other particles
are randomly placed around it, with distance spacing uniform in
log(r). After 40 cycles are carried out, the code terminates, and the
force-law accuracy can be examined by analysing the file
`forcetest.txt` .

-------

**FORCETEST_FIXEDPARTICLESET**

This always checks the same particle IDs if force accuracy is checked
during a run.

-------

**VTUNE_INSTRUMENT**

This option creates additional instrumentation instructions for the
Intel VTune code performance tool, based on the internal timing
routines. This can be used for a performance analysis based on this
tool.

-------

**DEBUG_MD5**

This option can be used to compute MD5 checksums of the P[] and SphP[]
arrays regularly in the code, with the results being written to the
log-file memory.txt. Using this, one can check for binary invariance
of the code when the code is interrupted and resumed from restart
files.


-------

**TILING** = 2

Replicates the read-in ICs the specified number of times in each
dimension.  This can be used for scaling tests.

-------

**SQUASH_TEST**

Squeezes the ICs on read-in on order to create a distortion from
spherical symmetry in certain force calculation tests.

-------

**DOMAIN_SPECIAL_CHECK**

Outputs test data to check the balancing algorithms.

-------

**EWALD_TEST**
 
A development test for testing the accuracy of the Ewald table lookup.

-------

**RECREATE_UNIQUE_IDS**

This option can be used to reinitialize the particle IDs upon
start-up. Useful if one has to deal with a broken IC file.

-------

**NO_STOP_BELOW_MINTIMESTEP**

Do not stop when the code wants to adopt a timestep below the
specified minimum timestep, but rather enforce this step size.

-------

**DO_NOT_PRODUCE_BIG_OUTPUT**

This special option allows one to refrain from writing large output
files (restart files, snapshots, and group catalogues), which can be
useful for scaling tests.

-------

**STOP_AFTER_STEP**  = 8

After the corresponding step has been completed, the simulation
ends. This is meant to simplify certain performance and scalability
tests.

-------

**MEASURE_TOTAL_MOMENTUM**

This option computes the total conjugate momentum after every
step. Can be used to check for manifest momentum conservation of
different force computation schemes.

-------

**TREE_NO_SAFETY_BOX**

When enabled, this disables the geometric 'near node' protection,
i.e. for the one-sided tree, one may then be closer to a node's center
than 1.5 times the node size, and for FMM, adjacent nodes may
interact.

